On 29 March 2024, software developer Andres Freund reported that he had found a maliciously introduced backdoor in the Linux utility xz within the liblzma library in versions 5.6.0 and 5.6.1 released in February 2024. While xz is commonly present in most Linux distributions, the backdoor only targeted Debian- and RPM-based systems running on the x86-64 architecture. At the time of discovery the backdoored version had not yet been widely deployed. The backdoor gives an attacker who possesses a specific Ed448 private key remote code execution capabilities on the affected Linux systems. The issue has been assigned a CVSS score of 10.0, the highest possible score.

A supply chain attack is a cyber-attack that seeks to damage an organization by targeting less secure elements in the supply chain. A supply chain attack can occur in any industry, from the financial sector, oil industry, to a government sector. A supply chain attack can happen in software or hardware. Cybercriminals typically tamper with the manufacturing or distribution of a product by installing malware or hardware-based spying components. Symantec's 2019 Internet Security Threat Report states that supply chain attacks increased by 78 percent in 2018. A supply chain is a system of activities involved in handling, distributing, manufacturing, and processing goods in order to move resources from a vendor into the hands of the final consumer. A supply chain is a complex network of interconnected players governed by supply and demand. Although supply chain attack is a broad term without a universally agreed upon definition, in reference to cyber-security, a supply chain attack involves physically tampering with electronics (computers, ATMs, power systems, factory data networks) in order to install undetectable malware for the purpose of bringing harm to a player further down the supply chain network. In a more general sense, a supply chain attack may not necessarily involve electronics. In 2010 when burglars gained access to the pharmaceutical giant Eli Lilly's supply warehouse, by drilling a hole in the roof and loading $80 million worth of prescription drugs into a truck, they could also have been said to carry out a supply chain attack. However, this article will discuss cyber attacks on physical supply networks that rely on technology; hence, a supply chain attack is a method used by cyber-criminals.

This timeline of computer viruses and worms presents a chronological timeline of noteworthy computer viruses, computer worms, Trojan horses, similar malware, related research and events.

Getty Images. 207. On Friday, a lone Microsoft developer rocked the world when he revealed a backdoor had been intentionally planted in xz Utils, an open source data compression utility available ... Threat actors added malicious code (or a backdoor) to the XZ utility versions 5.6.0 and 5.6.1. The installed backdoor works by manipulating the sshd, a server process that facilitates secure internet connections using the SSH protocol. The sshd is responsible for user authentication, encryption, terminal connections, file transfers, and tunneling. How to remediate CVE-2024-3094. Immediately downgrade your version of xz to an earlier version (5.4.6 is the latest unaffected version in most distributions). After downgrading xz, either reboot your machine or restart the OpenSSH server in order to remove the patched code from memory -. sudo systemctl restart ssh. That operation matches the style of the XZ Utils backdoor far more than the cruder supply chain attacks of APT41 or Lazarus, by comparison. "It could very well be someone else," says Aitel. Summary. [Updated] On March 29, several companies issued a warning regarding a backdoor found in the XZ Utils software. XZ Utils is a data compression software and may be present in Linux distributions. The malicious code may allow a Threat Actor, with the right authentication key, to achieve gated pre-auth RCE on affected systems.