On 29 March 2024, software developer Andres Freund reported that he had found a maliciously introduced backdoor in the Linux utility xz within the liblzma library in versions 5.6.0 and 5.6.1 released in February 2024. The backdoor gives an attacker remote code execution capabilities on the affected Linux system. Microsoft employee and PostgreSQL developer Andres Freund reported the backdoor after investigating a performance regression in Debian Sid. Freund noticed that SSH connections were generating an unexpectedly high amount of CPU usage as well as causing errors in Valgrind, a memory debugging tool. Freund reported his finding to Openwall Project's open source security mailing list, which brought it to the attention of various software vendors. There is evidence that the attacker made efforts to obfuscate the code, as the backdoor consists of multiple stages that act together. Once the compromised version is incorporated into the operating system, it alters the behavior of OpenSSH's SSH server daemon by abusing the systemd library, allowing the attacker to gain the same level of access as any authorized administrator. According to the analysis by Red Hat, the backdoor can 'enable a malicious actor to break sshd authentication and gain unauthorized access to the entire system remotely'. A subsequent investigation found that the campaign to insert the backdoor into the XZ Utils project was a culmination of approximately three years of effort by a user going by the name Jia Tan and the nickname JiaT75 to gain access to a position of trust within the project. After a period of pressure on the founder and head maintainer to hand over the control of the project via apparent sock puppetry, Jia Tan gained the position of co-maintainer of XZ Utils and was able to sign off on version 5.6.0, which introduced the backdoor, and version 5.6.1, which patched some anomalous behavior that can be apparent during software testing of the operating system. Some of the suspected sock puppetry pseudonyms are Jigar Kumar, krygorin4545, and misoeater91. It is suspected that the names Jia Tan, as well as the supposed code author Hans Jansen (for versions 5.6.0 and 5.6.1) are simply names invented by participants of the campaign. Neither have any sort of visible public presence in software development beyond the short few years of the campaign. The backdoor was notable for its level of sophistication and for the fact that the perpetrator practiced a high level of operational security for a long period of time while working to attain a position of trust. American security researcher Dave Aitel has suggested that it fits the pattern attributable to APT29, an advanced persistent threat actor believed to be working on behalf of the Russian SVR. Others have suggested that it could be any state actor or a non-state actor of considerable resources.